In this section you will learn to interpret a work plan;
Make a 360 degree scan;
Incorporate government priorities into a work plan;
And adjust a work plan according to new information.
This section should take you approximately 20 minutes to complete.
A work plan is a living document
in which you define and prioritize your unit’s activities.
Think of it as a to-do list for the upcoming year.
It helps you to communicate how you’ll be assigning resources
and managing timelines.
It’s the cornerstone of your planning process because
it supports your budget and reporting activities.
Typically, you wouldn’t start from scratch.
You would simply review last year's work plan, budget and reports
to identify what needs to be kept,
added
or removed for the new year.
But even before putting together your work plan,
it’s useful to step out of your role and look at the big picture.
It all starts with the Speech from the Throne,
which outlines government priorities.
These priorities will cascade down to you as a manager,
and will need to be reflected in your work plan.
After the Speech from the Throne,
the Prime Minister addresses a mandate letter
to each department’s minister.
In it, the Prime Minister sets out their overall expectations
and policy objectives.
Every year, there is a federal budget,
which sets Canada’s economic agenda for the year.
Departments will have priorities and objectives
that align to this agenda in addition to other core mandates.
The organization’s core responsibilities, results,
results indicators, and program inventory
are outlined in a Departmental Results Framework – or “DRF”.
Then there is the Departmental Plan, which outlines, amongst other things,
an organization’s expenditure plans for the coming year.
It includes in more detail the elements of the DRF,
expected results, and associated resourcing requirements,
covering a three-year period.
Then you may have plans per sector, branch, and directorate.
This is where your work plan comes in!
You build your work plan
around the activities that are the responsibility of your unit
and this naturally ties back into the Departmental Plan and DRF.
At this point, you might be wondering what a work plan looks like.
Not all units use the same model.
By talking to your colleagues and to folks in corporate planning and finance,
you can find out which one is used in your office.
Here is a typical work plan structure. Have a look!
Also, look in the Files section on the top right to find work plan examples.
Take a moment now to explore the different sections of a work plan.
To build a work plan, it helps to understand the historical
and cultural context of your unit by asking yourself a series of questions.
This is what we call the 360 Scan.
Here’s a typical example of last year’s work plan.
Try to apply the questions in the 360 Scan document
to this fictional example.
You may access the 360 Scan document at any time
from the File icon on the top right.
At this point, you should understand the context, both historically
and culturally, and be in a position to craft this year’s work plan!
Imagine that your director shares with you
this coming year’s priorities for your directorate:
protect aquatic ecosystems,
sustain fisheries and manage the issuing of licenses.
Using the dropdown menus,
choose the best option for each section of this work plan.
To help you wrap your mind around how to fill out the other sections
of the work plan, let’s continue with the same scenario.
Looking at your draft,
you’ll notice that some items may have been dropped into the wrong location
or may be missing.
Update your draft accordingly.
Alright.
Your director tells you that they’ve been to a steering committee meeting
and that they now have three new pieces of information
that should be reflected in your work plan:
1) there will be new software implementation
to speed up the issuing of licenses;
2) there’s a new policy that now requires licenses to be issued in 15 days,
not 30 days, starting on November 1st;
and 3) there’s been a decision not to replace a retiring employee.
Let’s take what you have learned into real life.
Your organization will have their own ways of doing things.
Take a time out from the course to scan your intranet
and see which templates are used.
Connect with your colleagues, your director, your financial officer
to have a chat about work plans.
So now that you know how to examine,
prepare, and adjust a work plan,
let’s see what you remember by taking this short quiz.